README.md, before:

# endpoints

### Description

Implementation of [Google Cloud Endpoints](https://developers.google.com/appengine/docs/python/endpoints/) in Dart.

These instructions assume that you are already set-up to run [Dart on App Engine](https://www.dartlang.org/cloud/).

### Usage

##### app.yaml configuration

`app.yaml` needs to contain a handler for `/_ah/spi/.*` so that App Engine
will check for a Cloud Endpoints configuration when deploying.

```
version: 1
runtime: custom
vm: true
api_version: 1
threadsafe: true

manual_scaling:
  instances: 1

handlers:
- url: /_ah/spi/.*
  script: bin/server.dart

- url: /.*
  script: bin/server.dart
```

##### Main API Class

Each API is defined by a class with an `@ApiClass` annotation,
specifying at least a `name` and a `version`.

```
@ApiClass(
  name: 'myDartApi',
  version: 'v1',
  description: 'My Awesome Dart Cloud Endpoint'
)
class MyApi {
  (...)
}
```

##### Request/Response Messages

The data that is sent to/from the API is defined in (non-abstract) classes.
These classes need to have an unnamed constructor that doesn't require any parameters.
The API Backend will call `new MyRequest()` and then set the properties one by one.

```
class MyRequest {
  String message;
  MyRequest([this.message]);
}
```

All public properties of this class will be used to construct an according
JSON object. Allowed types are `int`, `double`, `bool`, `string`, `DateTime`,
another message class, or a `List<T>` using one of those types.

You can define extra options for the properties by using an @ApiProperty annotation.

The `variant` parameter influences how numbers are handled in the backend.

For `int` properties the parameter can take the values `int32`, `uint32`, `int64` or `uint64`.
The 64-bit variants will be represented as `String` in the JSON objects.

For `double` properties the `variant` parameter can take the value `double` or `float`

##### Methods

Inside of your API class you can define public methods that will
correspond to methods that can be called on your API.

API Methods take one non-optional request message class as parameter and return
a response message class or a Future of a response message class.

```
MyResponse myMethod(MyRequest request) {

  return new MyResponse();
}
```

```
Future<MyResponse> myFutureMethod(MyRequest request) {
  ...
    completer.complete(new MyResponse();
  ...
  return completer.future;
}
```

If your method doesn't need a request or doesn't return a response you can
use the `VoidMessage` class instead.

```
VoidMessage hearNoEvilSpeakNoEvil(VoidMessage _) {
  return null;
}
```

To turn your methods into actual API methods you will need to add an
`@ApiMethod` annotation, specifying at least a `name` and a `path`.
You can also define the HTTP-`method` if it is different from the default `GET`
and a `description` to be displayed in the discovery document, API Explorer and
generated client libraries.

Some examples:
```
@ApiMethod(
  name: 'resource.list',
  path: 'resource',
  description: 'list models'
)
MyModelList list(VoidMessage _) {...}
```

```
@ApiMethod(
  name: 'resource.insert',
  path: 'resource',
  method: 'POST',
  description: 'insert model'
)
MyModel insert(MyModel request) {...}
```

```
@ApiMethod(
  name: 'resource.get',
  path: 'resource/{id}',
  description: 'get model'
)
MyModel get(MyModelRequest request) {...}
```

```
@ApiMethod(
  name: 'resource.update',
  path: 'resource/{id}',
  method: 'PUT',
  description: 'update model'
)
MyModel update(MyModel request) {...}
```

##### Authentication

If you want to use OAuth authentication in your API, you will first have to
get a Client ID from the [Google Developers Console](https://console.developers.google.com/).
You then add this Client ID to the `allowedClientIds` property of the
`@ApiClass` annotation.

```
@ApiClass(
  name: 'myDartApi',
  version: 'v1',
  description: 'My Awesome Dart Cloud Endpoint'
  allowedClientIds: const ['MY_CLIENT_ID']
)
```

If you want to test your API using the [Google APIs Explorer](https://developers.google.com/apis-explorer/)
(see below) you can also add the `API_EXPLORER_CLIENT_ID`.

```
@ApiClass(
  name: 'myDartApi',
  version: 'v1',
  description: 'My Awesome Dart Cloud Endpoint'
  allowedClientIds: const ['MY_CLIENT_ID', API_EXPLORER_CLIENT_ID]
)
```

For the methods where you need authentication you add an extra `ApiUser` parameter.

```
@ApiMethod(
  name: 'resource.auth_get',
  path: 'resource/{id}',
  description: 'get model'
)
MyModel authGet(MyModelRequest request, ApiUser user) {...}
```

If no valid user can be retrieved from the HTTP request, a 401 Unauthorized error will be
automatically returned before actually calling your method. Otherwise you can access the
user's Google ID and email adress (if authentication included the `email` scope).

If you want to check successful authentication yourself, or authentication is optional
for your method you can include the `ApiUser` parameter as optional parameter.

```
@ApiMethod(
  name: 'resource.auth_get',
  path: 'resource/{id}',
  description: 'get model'
)
MyModel authGet(MyModelRequest request, [ApiUser user]) {...}
```

In this case `user` will be `null` if no authentication happened,
or the authentication wasn't for one of your specified Client IDs.
If the authentication failed because of invalid or expired tokens,
this will still trigger a 401 error.

##### Errors

If you want to return errors to users of your API, e.g. if a requested entity wasn't found,
you can throw an `EndpointsError` in your method.

It's recommended to use one of the predefined error classes:

-  400 `throw new BadRequestError('You sent some data we don't understand.');`
-  401 `throw new UnauthorizedError('You need to be authenticated.')`
-  403 `throw new ForbiddenError('You are not allowed to do this!')`
-  404 `throw new NotFoundError('We didn't find what you are looking for.');`
-  500 `throw new InternalServerError('We did something wrong...');`

Any uncaught errors happening in your API method will be returned as `InternalServerError`.


##### API Server

In `bin/server.dart` create a new instance of ApiServer and add your Api class instances.
You then have two options to use the API Server to serve API responses.

-  `handleRequest`

This method takes a `HttpRequest` and handles it accordingly.
You should only call it for requests to `/_ah/spi/*`,
it will return a 501 error response for other requests.

```
ApiServer api_server;

void _handler(HttpRequest request) {
  if (request.uri.path.startsWith('/_ah/spi/')) {
    api_server.handleRequest(request);
    return;
  }

  // Do your normal request handling here

  context.assets.serve(request.uri.path);
}

void main() {
  api_server = new ApiServer();
  api_server.addApi(new MyApi());

  runAppEngine(_handler).then((_) {
    // Server running.
  });
}
```

-  Shelf `handler`

ApiServer exposes a shelf handler which you can add to a shelf cascade,
best before all your other handlers.

Since APIs can return 404 as a valid response, the default configuration of
`shelf.Cascade` which cascades on 404 and 405 errors doesn't work.
Instead you will have to use 501 responses to trigger cascading.
You can also return `ApiServer.cascadeResponse` from your methods to do this.

```
void main() {
  var api_server = new ApiServer();
  api_server.addApi(new MyApi());
  var cascade = new Cascade(statusCodes: [501])
    .add(api_server.handler)
    .add(_myHandler)
    .add(shelf_ae.assetHandler);

  shelf_ae.serve(cascade.handler);
}
```

##### Testing

Once you have started the dev server you can access the API Explorer at
`http://localhost:8080/_ah/api/explorer`

Using the explorer you can test out all the methods to see if they work like expected.
If there are errors in generating and or calling your API they will be displayed in the log.

After deploying the app to App Engine you can access the API Explorer at
`https://your_api_id.appspot.com/_ah/api/explorer`


##### Using your API

Once your API is deployed you can use the [Discovery API Client Generator](https://github.com/dart-lang/discovery_api_dart_client_generator)
to generate client and server-side libraries to access your API.

For this you have to download the discovery document and use it with the generator

```
URL='https://your_app_id.appspot.com/_ah/api/discovery/v1/apis/yourApi/v1/rest'
mkdir input
curl -s -o input/myapi.json $URL
bin/generate.dart generate --input-dir=input --output-dir=output --package-name=myapi
```

You can then include the library in your project. Due to the way that the deploy process works it's easiest to copy the files of the generated client library to the lib folder of your project.
The libraries can be used like any of the other Google Client API libraries, [some samples here](https://github.com/dart-lang/googleapis_examples).

There's also a [TicTacToe sample](https://github.com/Scarygami/appengine-vm-endpoints-tictactoe-dart)
with a full client- and server-side implementation.

You can also use client libraries in other languages to access your API.
See the official [Google Cloud Endpoints docs](https://developers.google.com/appengine/docs/python/endpoints/)
for more information about this and Endpoints in general.

Commit message:

Add note about VM issue

README.md, after:

# endpoints

### Description

Implementation of [Google Cloud Endpoints](https://developers.google.com/appengine/docs/python/endpoints/) in Dart.

These instructions assume that you are already set-up to run [Dart on App Engine](https://www.dartlang.org/cloud/).

> <b>Important:
> There currently is a bug in Managed VMs (used to work during the preview)
> where requests to `/_ah/spi/.*` don't reach the VM which unfortunately means
> that this currently can't be used in production.
> You can test in the local dev environment until this issue is fixed:
> https://code.google.com/p/googleappengine/issues/detail?id=11436</b>

### Usage

##### app.yaml configuration

`app.yaml` needs to contain a handler for `/_ah/spi/.*` so that App Engine
will check for a Cloud Endpoints configuration when deploying.

```
version: 1
runtime: custom
vm: true
api_version: 1
threadsafe: true

manual_scaling:
  instances: 1

handlers:
- url: /_ah/spi/.*
  script: bin/server.dart

- url: /.*
  script: bin/server.dart
```

##### Main API Class

Each API is defined by a class with an `@ApiClass` annotation,
specifying at least a `name` and a `version`.

```
@ApiClass(
  name: 'myDartApi',
  version: 'v1',
  description: 'My Awesome Dart Cloud Endpoint'
)
class MyApi {
  (...)
}
```

##### Request/Response Messages

The data that is sent to/from the API is defined in (non-abstract) classes.
These classes need to have an unnamed constructor that doesn't require any parameters.
The API Backend will call `new MyRequest()` and then set the properties one by one.

```
class MyRequest {
  String message;
  MyRequest([this.message]);
}
```

All public properties of this class will be used to construct an according
JSON object. Allowed types are `int`, `double`, `bool`, `string`, `DateTime`,
another message class, or a `List<T>` using one of those types.

You can define extra options for the properties by using an @ApiProperty annotation.

The `variant` parameter influences how numbers are handled in the backend.

For `int` properties the parameter can take the values `int32`, `uint32`, `int64` or `uint64`.
The 64-bit variants will be represented as `String` in the JSON objects.

For `double` properties the `variant` parameter can take the value `double` or `float`

##### Methods

Inside of your API class you can define public methods that will
correspond to methods that can be called on your API.

API Methods take one non-optional request message class as parameter and return
a response message class or a Future of a response message class.

```
MyResponse myMethod(MyRequest request) {

  return new MyResponse();
}
```

```
Future<MyResponse> myFutureMethod(MyRequest request) {
  ...
    completer.complete(new MyResponse();
  ...
  return completer.future;
}
```

If your method doesn't need a request or doesn't return a response you can
use the `VoidMessage` class instead.

```
VoidMessage hearNoEvilSpeakNoEvil(VoidMessage _) {
  return null;
}
```

To turn your methods into actual API methods you will need to add an
`@ApiMethod` annotation, specifying at least a `name` and a `path`.
You can also define the HTTP-`method` if it is different from the default `GET`
and a `description` to be displayed in the discovery document, API Explorer and
generated client libraries.

Some examples:
```
@ApiMethod(
  name: 'resource.list',
  path: 'resource',
  description: 'list models'
)
MyModelList list(VoidMessage _) {...}
```

```
@ApiMethod(
  name: 'resource.insert',
  path: 'resource',
  method: 'POST',
  description: 'insert model'
)
MyModel insert(MyModel request) {...}
```

```
@ApiMethod(
  name: 'resource.get',
  path: 'resource/{id}',
  description: 'get model'
)
MyModel get(MyModelRequest request) {...}
```

```
@ApiMethod(
  name: 'resource.update',
  path: 'resource/{id}',
  method: 'PUT',
  description: 'update model'
)
MyModel update(MyModel request) {...}
```

##### Authentication

If you want to use OAuth authentication in your API, you will first have to
get a Client ID from the [Google Developers Console](https://console.developers.google.com/).
You then add this Client ID to the `allowedClientIds` property of the
`@ApiClass` annotation.

```
@ApiClass(
  name: 'myDartApi',
  version: 'v1',
  description: 'My Awesome Dart Cloud Endpoint'
  allowedClientIds: const ['MY_CLIENT_ID']
)
```

If you want to test your API using the [Google APIs Explorer](https://developers.google.com/apis-explorer/)
(see below) you can also add the `API_EXPLORER_CLIENT_ID`.

```
@ApiClass(
  name: 'myDartApi',
  version: 'v1',
  description: 'My Awesome Dart Cloud Endpoint'
  allowedClientIds: const ['MY_CLIENT_ID', API_EXPLORER_CLIENT_ID]
)
```

For the methods where you need authentication you add an extra `ApiUser` parameter.

```
@ApiMethod(
  name: 'resource.auth_get',
  path: 'resource/{id}',
  description: 'get model'
)
MyModel authGet(MyModelRequest request, ApiUser user) {...}
```

If no valid user can be retrieved from the HTTP request, a 401 Unauthorized error will be
automatically returned before actually calling your method. Otherwise you can access the
user's Google ID and email adress (if authentication included the `email` scope).

If you want to check successful authentication yourself, or authentication is optional
for your method you can include the `ApiUser` parameter as optional parameter.

```
@ApiMethod(
  name: 'resource.auth_get',
  path: 'resource/{id}',
  description: 'get model'
)
MyModel authGet(MyModelRequest request, [ApiUser user]) {...}
```

In this case `user` will be `null` if no authentication happened,
or the authentication wasn't for one of your specified Client IDs.
If the authentication failed because of invalid or expired tokens,
this will still trigger a 401 error.

##### Errors

If you want to return errors to users of your API, e.g. if a requested entity wasn't found,
you can throw an `EndpointsError` in your method.

It's recommended to use one of the predefined error classes:

-  400 `throw new BadRequestError('You sent some data we don't understand.');`
-  401 `throw new UnauthorizedError('You need to be authenticated.')`
-  403 `throw new ForbiddenError('You are not allowed to do this!')`
-  404 `throw new NotFoundError('We didn't find what you are looking for.');`
-  500 `throw new InternalServerError('We did something wrong...');`

Any uncaught errors happening in your API method will be returned as `InternalServerError`.


##### API Server

In `bin/server.dart` create a new instance of ApiServer and add your Api class instances.
You then have two options to use the API Server to serve API responses.

-  `handleRequest`

This method takes a `HttpRequest` and handles it accordingly.
You should only call it for requests to `/_ah/spi/*`,
it will return a 501 error response for other requests.

```
ApiServer api_server;

void _handler(HttpRequest request) {
  if (request.uri.path.startsWith('/_ah/spi/')) {
    api_server.handleRequest(request);
    return;
  }

  // Do your normal request handling here

  context.assets.serve(request.uri.path);
}

void main() {
  api_server = new ApiServer();
  api_server.addApi(new MyApi());

  runAppEngine(_handler).then((_) {
    // Server running.
  });
}
```

-  Shelf `handler`

ApiServer exposes a shelf handler which you can add to a shelf cascade,
best before all your other handlers.

Since APIs can return 404 as a valid response, the default configuration of
`shelf.Cascade` which cascades on 404 and 405 errors doesn't work.
Instead you will have to use 501 responses to trigger cascading.
You can also return `ApiServer.cascadeResponse` from your methods to do this.

```
void main() {
  var api_server = new ApiServer();
  api_server.addApi(new MyApi());
  var cascade = new Cascade(statusCodes: [501])
    .add(api_server.handler)
    .add(_myHandler)
    .add(shelf_ae.assetHandler);

  shelf_ae.serve(cascade.handler);
}
```

##### Testing

Once you have started the dev server you can access the API Explorer at
`http://localhost:8080/_ah/api/explorer`

Using the explorer you can test out all the methods to see if they work like expected.
If there are errors in generating and or calling your API they will be displayed in the log.

After deploying the app to App Engine you can access the API Explorer at
`https://your_api_id.appspot.com/_ah/api/explorer`


##### Using your API

Once your API is deployed you can use the [Discovery API Client Generator](https://github.com/dart-lang/discovery_api_dart_client_generator)
to generate client and server-side libraries to access your API.

For this you have to download the discovery document and use it with the generator

```
URL='https://your_app_id.appspot.com/_ah/api/discovery/v1/apis/yourApi/v1/rest'
mkdir input
curl -s -o input/myapi.json $URL
bin/generate.dart generate --input-dir=input --output-dir=output --package-name=myapi
```

You can then include the library in your project. Due to the way that the deploy process works it's easiest to copy the files of the generated client library to the lib folder of your project.
The libraries can be used like any of the other Google Client API libraries, [some samples here](https://github.com/dart-lang/googleapis_examples).

There's also a [TicTacToe sample](https://github.com/Scarygami/appengine-vm-endpoints-tictactoe-dart)
with a full client- and server-side implementation.

You can also use client libraries in other languages to access your API.
See the official [Google Cloud Endpoints docs](https://developers.google.com/appengine/docs/python/endpoints/)
for more information about this and Endpoints in general.
